Add update-symlink to data download docs (#573)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: docs/getting-started/accessing-resources/getting-access-to-data.md

Broadly speaking, there are three kinds of ScPCA data you might wish to work with:

1. Data from the ScPCA Portal
    - You can find out more about the contents of files and how they were processed from the ScPCA documentation: <https://scpca.readthedocs.io>.
    - OpenScPCA project contributors [with an Amazon Web Services (AWS) account](./index.md#getting-access-to-aws) can access data using the provided `download-data.py` script, [as described below](#using-the-download-data-script).

>         - If you have not yet been onboarded to OpenScPCA, you will need to access data [directly from the ScPCA Portal](#accessing-data-from-the-scpca-portal).

Reviewer: I don't think this should be a subpoint, and I think it should be phrased positively.
```suggestion
    - All data is also available [directly from the ScPCA Portal](#accessing-data-from-the-scpca-portal) for users who have not yet fully joined the OpenSCPCA project.
```

    - These data are used for automated testing, but you can also use them while developing your module if smaller files helps make development more efficient.
    - You do not need an AWS account to download the test files, so you can use this data before you are granted full access to ScPCA data.

> !!! tip "Log into AWS CLI before running the download scripts"

Reviewer: I think this tip is in the wrong place now. It should be under the S3 section, as you don't need these scripts for access through the Portal.

>     Below, we describe how to use both the `data-download.py` and `results-download.py` script to download ScPCA data and result files, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Below, we describe how to use the `data-download.py` and `results-download.py` scripts to download ScPCA data and result files, respectively.
```

>     Before running either of these scripts locally (e.g., not from a [virtual computer](../../aws/index.md#lightsail-for-research-virtual-computing-with-aws)), you will need to be [logged into your AWS CLI profile](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#logging-in-to-a-new-session).

Reviewer: I want to clarify that not all virtual computers don't require login; they might have their own virtual systems! So maybe we want to say lightsail specifically as well...

We also probably should say somewhere that downloading test data doesn't require logging in. 

```suggestion
    Before running either of these scripts locally (i.e., not from an ALSF-provided [virtual computer](../../aws/index.md#lightsail-for-research-virtual-computing-with-aws)), you will need to be [logged into your AWS CLI profile](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#logging-in-to-a-new-session).
```

    Note that you can also [add this profile definition to your shell profile file](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#storing-your-aws-profile-name) so that it will always be defined in any terminal session.

> - You can list all possible arguments and their usage for the download data script with the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can list all available arguments and their usage for the download data script with the following:
```

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --help
    ```

- You can run the download script with all default options to download all processed samples from the most recent release in `SingleCellExperiment` format:

    !!! warning
        **The full data release download is quite large: over 35 GB for `SingleCellExperiment` format, and over 100 GB for `AnnData` format.
        Please download the full data release with caution!**

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py
    ```

- If you prefer to work with `AnnData` files, use the `--format` option as follows:

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --format AnnData
    ```

> - To download a specific release other than the most recent release, you can use the `--release` option as follows.

Reviewer: I don't feel like "as follows" is needed everywhere, as it becomes pretty self-evident.
```suggestion
- To download a specific release other than the most recent release, you can use the `--release` option.
```

> Again, please download full data releases with caution, as they are quite large!

Reviewer: The please makes it sound like this is for our sake, not for theirs.
```suggestion
Again, download full data releases with caution, as they are quite large!
```

>     - First, you may wish to use the `--list-releases` flag to see all available releases, which are named in `YYYY-MM-DD` format based on their release date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - You can use the `--list-releases` flag to see all available releases, which are named in `YYYY-MM-DD` format based on their release date.
```

    ```sh
    # First, see which releases are available for download
    ./download-data.py --list-releases

    # Download SingleCellExperiment format files for a specific release
    # For example, this downloads the 2024-05-01 release
    ./download-data.py --release 2024-05-01

    # Download AnnData format files for a specific release, for example
    ./download-data.py --release 2024-05-01 --format AnnData
    ```

> - If you're only working with a subset of the data, you can use the `--projects` or `--samples` option to download select projects or samples, respectively (note that these options are mutually exclusive):

Reviewer: Let's move the project/sample options before the release option? It will flow better into the symlink update option mentioned later as well.

    ```sh
    # use the --projects option
    ./download-data.py --projects SCPCPXXXXXX

    # use the --samples option
    ./download-data.py --samples SCPCSXXXXXX,SCPCSXXXXXY
    ```

- To review the files would be downloaded without performing the download yet, you can use the `--dryrun` option as follows.
    - We strongly recommend using the `--dryrun` flag the first time you run the script for a new data download to ensure the downloaded files are as expected.

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --dryrun

    # show what would be downloaded when the --projects option is used, for example
    ./download-data.py --projects SCPCPXXXXXX --dryrun
    ```

> The `download-data.py` script will always update the `data/current` symlink to point to the specified release directory.
> You can use the [`--update-symlink` flag described below](#updating-the-current-symlink) to update which release directory the `data/current` symlink directs to.

Reviewer: This is not correct. It does _not_ update for specified releases, only when downloading the default `current` release or test data, see https://github.com/jashapiro/OpenScPCA-analysis/blob/e25539c402262ce7123791bc861703c191c1f067/download-data.py#L531-L533

```suggestion
The `download-data.py` script will update the `data/current` symlink to point to the current release directory when run without a `--release` option or to the test data directory when run with `--test-data`.
If you want to instead point to a specific release, you can use the [`--update-symlink` flag described below](#updating-the-current-symlink) to update which release directory the `data/current` symlink directs to.
```

> ### Download data file structure

Reviewer: Maybe?
```suggestion
### Downloaded data file structure
```

Author: yeah, i agree

- You can list all the options for the download data script by running the following from the root directory of the repository:
    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --help
    ```

- You can run the download script with all default options to download all processed samples from the most recent release in `SingleCellExperiment` format:

    !!! warning
        **The full data release download is quite large: over 35 GB for `SingleCellExperiment` format, and over 100 GB for `AnnData` format.
        Please download the full data release with caution!**

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py
    ```

- If you prefer to work with `AnnData` files, use the `--format` option as follows:

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --format AnnData
    ```

- To download a specific release, you can use the `--release` flag as follows:

<!--

TODO: This section needs to be reworked to avoid unexpected downloads. We should recommend --use-release instead.

These commands will download either test data or results, respectively, and will

```sh
./download-data.py --release current

> ./download-results.py --release current

Reviewer: I think it is time to revive this section?

```
If you had already downloaded the most recent data or results, this will not repeat downloading the files you already have.

-->

> - To review what samples would be downloaded without performing the download yet, you can use the `--dryrun` option as follows.

Reviewer: I think it might make sense to put this option after the projects and maybe show it combined with other options as well. 
```suggestion
- To review the files would be downloaded without performing the download yet, you can use the `--dryrun` option as follows.
```

    - We strongly recommend using the `--dryrun` flag the first time you run the script for a new data download to ensure the downloaded files are as expected.

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --dryrun
    ```

> - If you're only working with a subset of the data, you can use the `--projects` or `--samples` to download select projects or samples, respectively (note that these options are mutually exclusive):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you're only working with a subset of the data, you can use the `--projects` or `--samples` options to download select projects or samples, respectively (note that these options are mutually exclusive)
  - To download multiple projects or samples, provide the ids as a comma separated list
```

    ```sh
    # use the --projects option
    ./download-data.py --projects SCPCPXXXXXX

    # use the --samples option
    ./download-data.py --samples SCPCSXXXXXX,SCPCSXXXXXY
    ```

> - To update the `data/current` symlink, for example if you have downloaded multiple releases and/or [test data](#accessing-test-data), use the `--update-symlink` flag in one of the following ways.

Reviewer: I think breaking this up makes sense. I don't necessarily love my rewrite though.
```suggestion
- To change the release that is linked to the `data/current` location use the `--update-symlink` flag.
  - This is useful for switching among multiple previously downloaded releases and/or [test data](#accessing-test-data)
```

  - Note that no data will be downloaded if you use this flag.

>     ```sh

Reviewer: Blank line for form. I have some fear that including the blank line before the code block that I would prefer could break the nesting, or I would have suggested it everywhere. But if you can, I would do it everywhere. 
```suggestion

    ```sh
```

└── current -> {Release}
```

!!! tip "The `data/current` directory"

>     The `data/current` directory is a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) to the most recently-downloaded data release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The `data/current` directory is a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) to the most recent data release.
```

We have provided a [`download-results.py` script](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/blob/main/download-results.py) that you can use to download results from a module that has been run in `OpenScPCA-nf`.

We briefly cover some of the most common use cases below, but we encourage you to review all the options available to you.
All examples below assume you are running the script from the root of the repository.

!!! tip "Log into AWS CLI before running the script"

>     Before running this script locally (i.e., not from an [ALSF-provided virtual computer](../../aws/index.md#lightsail-for-research-virtual-computing-with-aws)), you will need to be [logged into your AWS CLI profile](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#logging-in-to-a-new-session).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Before running this script locally (i.e., not using [Lightsail for Research](../../aws/index.md#lightsail-for-research-virtual-computing-with-aws)), you will need to be [logged into your AWS CLI profile](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#logging-in-to-a-new-session).
```

Author: Huh, I thought I got this... Oh well, thanks!

We have provided a [`download-results.py` script](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/blob/main/download-results.py) that you can use to download results from a module that has been run in `OpenScPCA-nf`.

We briefly cover some of the most common use cases below, but we encourage you to review all the options available to you.
All examples below assume you are running the script from the root of the repository.

!!! tip "Log into AWS CLI before running the script"

>     Before running this script locally (i.e., not from an [ALSF-provided virtual computer](../../aws/index.md#lightsail-for-research-virtual-computing-with-aws)), you will need to be [logged into your AWS CLI profile](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#logging-in-to-a-new-session).

Reviewer: modify this if you follow the earlier suggestion

    Note that you can also [add this profile definition to your shell profile file](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#storing-your-aws-profile-name) so that it will always be defined in any terminal session.

> - You can list all possible arguments and their usage for the results download script with the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can list all available arguments and their usage for the results download script with the following:
```

This will list all modules available in, by default, the current release:

    ```sh
    ./download-results.py --list-modules
    ```

- To see the result files that would be downloaded without performing the download yet, you can use the `--dryrun` flag as follows:
    - We strongly recommend using the `--dryrun` flag the first time you run the script for a new data download to ensure the downloaded files are as expected.

    ```sh
    ./download-results.py --modules module-name --dryrun
    ```

- While the structure of results files varies by module, some modules' results will be organized by project and/or sample.
For those modules, you can use either the `--projects` or `--samples` flag (noting that these options are mutually exclusive) to download results specific to one or more projects or samples, respectively:

    ```sh
    # use the --projects option
    ./download-results.py --modules module-name --dryrun --projects SCPCPXXXXXX

    # use the --samples option
    ./download-results.py --modules module-name --dryrun --samples SCPCSXXXXXX,SCPCSXXXXXY
    ```

> ### Download result file structure

Reviewer: similar my "maybe?" above
```suggestion
### Downloaded results file structure
```

We briefly cover some of the most common use cases below, but we encourage you to review all the options available to you.

- You can list all the options for `download-results.py` by running the following from the root directory of the repository:
    ```sh
    ./download-results.py --help
    ```

> - To download results for one or more modules, use the `--modules` option as follows:

Reviewer: Here too, I think it is better to be explicit
```suggestion
- To download results for one or more modules, use the `--modules` option with the module directory name(s) as a comma separated list:
```

>     ```sh

Reviewer: blank space
```suggestion

    ```sh
```

└── current -> {Release}
```

!!! tip "The `data/current` directory"

>     The `data/current` directory is a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) to the most recently-downloaded release directory.

Reviewer: Trying to make this more accurate. We could add some weasel words here, like "generally" or something about how it might point to test data.
```suggestion
    The `data/current` directory is a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) to the most recent release directory available locally.
```

You can update this symlink to point to a different data release directory (or to the test data directory) in one of two ways:

1. When you download a new data or results release, `data/current` will automatically be updated to direct to the newly-downloaded release directory.
    - Both the `download-data.py` and `download-results.py` scripts will print a message telling you where `current` directs to.
1. You can use the `download-data.py` script with the `--update-symlink` flag to redirect the `data/current` symlink to a release of your choice.
Note that no data will be downloaded if you use this flag.
Below are some common use cases for this flag:

    ```sh
    # By default, this flag will update the current symlink to direct to the
    #  most recent release that is present on your computer
    ./download-data.py --update-symlink

    # Use the --release option to specify which release to direct the symlink to
    ./download-data.py --update-symlink --release 2025-05-01

    # Use the --test-data flag to direct the symlink to the test data
    ./download-data.py --update-symlink --test-data
    ```

## Accessing data from the ScPCA Portal

> If you have not yet been [granted access to ScPCA data via AWS](./index.md#getting-access-to-aws), you will need to obtain data directly from [the ScPCA Portal that the Data Lab maintains](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have not yet been [granted access to OpenScPCA AWS resources](./index.md#getting-access-to-aws), you will need to obtain data directly from [the ScPCA Portal](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org).
```

You can download the project(s) or sample(s) you are interested in analyzing from the ScPCA Portal.

> Note that you can also access the [OpenScPCA test data](#accessing-test-data) before getting AWS access as well.

Reviewer: duplocated "access" and also/as well
```suggestion
Note that you can download the [OpenScPCA test data](#accessing-test-data) before getting AWS access as well.
```

### Organizing data files

You should store your downloaded data in a `portal-downloads` subdirectory in your local `OpenScPCA-analysis` repository's `data` directory.
Then, you should create a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) at `data/current` to direct to `data/portal-downloads`.
You can accomplish this with the following:

```sh
# create the data/portal-downloads directory
mkdir -p data/portal-downloads

# set up a symlink from data/current to data/portal-downloads
ln -s data/portal-downloads data/current
```

You can then develop your analysis specifying the `data/current` path when reading in data.
This way, your directory names will be compatible with the file structure established by the [OpenScPCA data download script](#using-the-download-data-script).

> Within `data/portal-downloads`, we further recommend organizing your files in the same manner [as the official OpenScPCA data download script does](#downloaded-data-file-structure), as in:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within `data/portal-downloads`, we further recommend organizing your files in the same manner [as the OpenScPCA data download script does](#downloaded-data-file-structure), as in:
```

These files are also used during automated testing of analysis modules. <!-- STUB_LINK for module GHAs -->

You can use the [download data script](#using-the-download-data-script) to download the test data for the project by using the `--test-data` flag.
Similarly, you use the [download result script](#accessing-scpca-module-results) to download ScPCA results from running completed modules on the test data by using the `--test-data` flag.

You do not need an AWS account set up to download the test data or results.

- To download test data with all other options set at default, run the following from the root of the repository:

    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --test-data
    ```

- To download a given module's results as generated with the test data, run the following from the root of the repository:

    ```sh
    ./download-results.py --modules module-name --test-data
    ```

Running either of the above commands will update the `data/current` symlink to point to the `data/test` directory.
This means any real ScPCA data or results you had previously downloaded will no longer be in the `data/current` path.

> You can use the `--update-symlink` flag, as described below, to update which release directory the `data/current` symlink directs to.

Reviewer: I think we need to specify that this option is only part of `download-data.py`?

## Updating the `current` symlink

> As described above, the `data/current` directory is a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) to the most recently-downloaded release directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described above, the `data/current` directory is a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) to the most recent release directory.
```

Note that no data will be downloaded if you use this flag.
Below are some common use cases for this flag:

    ```sh
    # By default, this flag will update the current symlink to direct to the
    #  most recent release that is present on your computer
    ./download-data.py --update-symlink

    # Use the --release option to specify which release to direct the symlink to
    ./download-data.py --update-symlink --release 2025-05-01

    # Use the --test-data flag to direct the symlink to the test data
    ./download-data.py --update-symlink --test-data
    ```

## Accessing data from the ScPCA Portal

If you have not formally joined the OpenScPCA project, you will need to obtain data directly from ScPCA Portal that the Data Lab maintains: <https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/>.

You can select the project(s) or sample(s) you are interested in analyzing and download them from the Portal.

We recommend creating a `portal-downloads` subdirectory in the local copy of the `data` directory, which can be accomplished by running the following command from the root of the repository on Linux or macOS:

```sh

> mkdir -p data/portal-downloads

Reviewer: I would probably suggest setting up a symlink as well at this point:
```suggestion
mkdir -p data/portal-downloads
# set up a symlink
ln -s data/portal-downloads data/current
```

```

You can then develop your analysis using these paths.

> However, before filing a pull request, you should change your paths to use `data/current` directory [established by the data download script](#download-data-file-structure).

Reviewer: If they set up a symlink, they can set their paths up properly the first time.

Which does suggest that we should be explicit about how they should organize files from portal downloads within this directory.

Finally, we should mention that the test data can be downloaded without an account as well.

Author: > Finally, we should mention that the test data can be downloaded without an account as well.

We do have this here, but it sounds like this was not so findable! I'll rework a bit so this is clearer. https://github.com/sjspielman/OpenScPCA-analysis/blob/d0ee8d17b3f2177930d778db0aeb7b804bbb95f3/docs/getting-started/accessing-resources/getting-access-to-data.md?plain=1#L276

Reviewer: Yes, I know it is in there, but I think it makes sense to add a mention here as well as a reminder.

You do not need an AWS account set up to download the test data or results.

- To download test data with all other options set at default, run the following from the root of the repository:
    ```sh
    ./download-data.py --test-data
    ```

- To download a given module's results as generated with the test data, run the following from the root of the repository:
    ```sh
    ./download-results.py --modules module-name --test-data
    ```

> Running either of the above commands will update the `data/current` symlink to point to the `data/test` directory, rather than a given data release directory.

Reviewer: I think the second clause is more confusing here. (what is "given", where?)
```suggestion
Running either of the above commands will update the `data/current` symlink to point to the `data/test` directory.
```

## Accessing data from the ScPCA Portal

If you have not yet been [granted access to ScPCA data via AWS](./index.md#getting-access-to-aws), you will need to obtain data directly from [the ScPCA Portal that the Data Lab maintains](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org).
You can download the project(s) or sample(s) you are interested in analyzing from the ScPCA Portal.

Note that you can also access the [OpenScPCA test data](#accessing-test-data) before getting AWS access as well.

### Organizing data files

You should store your downloaded data in a `portal-downloads` subdirectory in your local `OpenScPCA-analysis` repository's `data` directory.
Then, you should create a [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) at `data/current` to direct to `data/portal-downloads`.
You can accomplish this with the following:

```sh
# create the data/portal-downloads directory
mkdir -p data/portal-downloads

# set up a symlink from data/current to data/portal-downloads

> ln -s data/portal-downloads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ln -s data/portal-downloads data/current
```
